68
69
National football associations manage a wide variety of activities. They are generally concerned with day-to-
day operations: managing competitions, communications, travel, finances, human resources, etc.
But there is another type of activity that national associations need to engage in: strategic management, 
which is different from operational management in three respects:
•	It is future oriented.
•	It involves the allocation (or reallocation) of a significant amount of resources.
•	It is based on analysis and insights.
The strategic management process results in a strategy that can be defined as a set of planned actions and 
decisions aimed at achieving a long-term goal. The strategy could be for the national association as a whole, 
or could be for a specific department or project.
This chapter will present a model for how strategic decisions can be made, put into a strategic plan and 
implemented. The focus is on how a strategy for a national association as a whole can be formulated, but 
the tools and methods presented can be applied at departmental, project and individual level as well.
The chapter is divided into five parts. It starts with a section highlighting the importance of having a strategic 
management system. The second section introduces the fundamental elements of the strategic management 
process and presents an analytical model. The third describes various tools for performing the initial strategic 
analysis. The fourth presents tools and methods for formulating strategies based on the results of the analysis. 
The chapter then ends with how to support the implementation of the strategies once they have been set out.
	> 1. Crafting strategy as a means to success
Think of any person or organisation you know of that has been successful not because they have the best 
talent or because of  pure luck. You will find that their success is linked to their ability to formulate a set of 
simple, long-term goals and objectives, organise themself in such a way as to pursue them effectively and 
then to carry them through to completion. In the world of football, Iceland’s men’s senior national team 
qualifying for UEFA EURO 2016 and reaching the quarter-finals, Belgium producing numerous youth talents 
or Norway growing women’s football, are all examples of successes that cannot be attributed to superior 
resources (talent) or pure luck, but are in fact the result of smart choices and good organisation directed at 
clear long-term goals.
Just as those national associations managed to achieve success against the odds because they stuck to their 
game plans, organisations with limited resources can increase their chances of being successful by making 
good decisions and organising themselves properly. This approach, whereby goals are defined and plans are 
devised for how to achieve them, is exactly what strategic management is. Although it is not necessary to 
formalise a strategic management system, it often does have its benefits. 
Strategic management makes three contributions to increasing the chances of an organisation achieving 
its mission and goals:
1.	Effective and efficient allocation of resources
2.	Coordination and decision-making support
3.	Employee purpose and motivation
	> 1.1. Effective and efficient allocation of resources
Strategic activities are typically long-term and irreversible and national associations do not have unlimited 
resources, so it is important to choose initiatives that are effective. A national association that decides to 
invest in a youth academy system, for instance, must therefore ensure that the right decisions are made and 
that the academy system is given sufficient time to prove itself. Without adopting a structured and analytical 
approach to decision-making, by means of a strategic management system, this might not happen. 
Another, frequent, risk of not having a solid strategic management system is that decisions could follow 
divergent paths or repeatedly zigzag back and forth between competing objectives. Because many associations’ 
goals can only be achieved in the long term, a lack of clear direction makes it difficult for the organisation to 
achieve them efficiently. Strategic management enables the national association to chart a coherent direction 
that contributes to the more effective and efficient allocation of resources.
Effectively allocating the available resources (infrastructure, finances, human resources, etc.) on the basis of 
clearly defined strategic objectives therefore helps national associations to increase their chances of success. 
For example, if infrastructure development is an important objective in a particular period, a key factor in 
guaranteeing success could be the allocation of increased resources – even at the expense of other non-priority 
areas – to give the people and units responsible the time and money to engage government agencies, apply 
for grants from international federations and plan investments, etc. In this instance, strategic management 
allows the national association to plan and apply available resources suitably in order to meet the objectives.
	> 1.2. Coordination and decision-making support
In recent times, national associations have found themselves growing in size (in terms of employees, volunteers 
and service providers) in order to meet the demands of an increasingly commercialised and professionalised 
sports environment. As a result, the dynamics of their decision-making processes have become more complex 
(see Figure 2.1).
In very small organisations (with ten employees or fewer), decision-making is usually centralised, with one 
person making all the decisions (facilitated by their knowledge of what everyone else in the organisation is 
doing) and providing guidance to everyone else. However, as organisations grow, it becomes increasingly 
difficult for leaders to retain the same degree of involvement without compromising efficiency.
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
