92
93
This type of matrix evaluates and scores the domains and initiatives in two dimensions: 
1.	Impact: What is the potential impact on the organisation’s mission, vision or goals?
2.	Complexity: What is the complexity, cost, effort or risk? 
Based on the assessment, the domains and initiatives are then positioned in the matrix. They should be 
evaluated in separate processes. Domains and initiatives that have the biggest impact while being low on 
complexity should be prioritised. If the organisation’s resources are not exhausted with this ‘low-hanging 
fruit’ or ‘quick wins’, or if there are significant gaps between the organisation’s vision and objectives and 
the identified actions, the organisation needs to investigate other strategic projects with high impact and 
high complexity, perhaps by drafting a business plan for each project and deciding on its feasibility based 
on these further studies.
	> 5. Strategic planning, communication and implementation
The last and often critical step in strategic management is implementing the domain goals and initiatives 
in order of priority. 
While effective implementation largely depends on how well the strategies have been drafted, well-formulated 
strategies do not automatically produce the best results. Research in this particular area has highlighted the 
fact that organisations struggle to do justice to effective strategies by properly executing them (Kikulis, 2000; 
Shilbury & Ferkins, 2011; Tawse & Tabesh, 2020). There are a number of possible reasons for discrepancies 
between the strategies and their implementation: 
1.	Strategies are not known or fully understood by those responsible for carrying them out. 
2.	There is resistance to change within the national association and among its stakeholders (for a 
variety of reasons, such as fear of anything new, fear of a loss of privileges, or personal insecurities).
3.	The individual or stakeholder lacks clarity about the expectations or lacks suitable experience.
4.	Employees and stakeholders are not sufficiently motivated or incentivised to fully pursue the strategies.
5.	There is a lack of control and follow-up.
A common thread running through all these obstacles is the management’s failure to fully understand that 
a national association does not act on its own, but that it does so through individuals: leaders, employees, 
volunteers, service providers, etc. How well a strategy is implemented therefore depends on how well these 
individuals are motivated to produce the desired results.
How successful this is depends on communication, the creation of appropriate organisational structures, 
budgeting and control, and the evaluation of individual performance. These elements will be discussed in 
greater detail in the subsequent chapters of this handbook, but for the purpose of completeness a brief 
description will follow.
	> 5.1. Writing and communicating a strategic plan
The starting point for communicating the association’s strategy to the stakeholders is to put it into writing. This 
document, the strategic plan, can be drafted in different versions to suit the audience and purpose. Versions 
for internal planning are typically more detailed and operational and contain deadlines and deliverables, 
whereas public documents are more general. It is up to the organisation to decide how much detail to include.
There is no standard, one-size-fits-all format for strategic plans, but the following sections are common:
1.	Introduction and context
2.	Mission, values and vision
3.	Focus areas
4.	Goals and objectives
5.	Initiatives
	> 5.2. Designing appropriate organisational structures
Ideally an association’s structure reflects its strategy. If a subdomain of elite football, such as the men’s under-21 
team, is a priority, the related initiatives should be placed in the organisation chart either as a departmental 
line function or as a subdepartment of a line function.
Line functions are the home of an organisation’s key activities or domains, such as national teams, grassroots 
or competitions management. Well-defined line functions improve an organisation’s effectiveness because each 
function is composed of fewer people and typically has a manager coordinating and running the function. 
People working in a specific line function will have an easier time engaging with the specific tasks, and both 
formal and social control is made easier. If the association’s strategy changes radically and priority is given 
to new domains, it will make sense for management to review the organisation chart and create new units. 
	> 5.3. Allocating resources and budgets
The budgeting process that follows strategy formulation is typically not a one-off process, but often has many 
repetitions and loops. The starting point should always be the draft strategic plan, on the basis of which, 
budgets should be defined for functions and activities. If there are budget or resource constraints, the strategic 
plan may need to be revised, then the budget adjusted accordingly, before being approved by the executive 
committee. Once both the strategic plan and the budget have been finalised, they can be made operational.
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
