90
91
Draebye and Palmieri (2017) explain how the Danish Football Association (DBU) made an important 
change to the way it formalised and coordinated its planning system in 2016. Before that, the DBU was 
used to its committees setting up working groups whenever they saw the need. This resulted in a myriad 
of groups, making it difficult to coordinate and keep track of the work being done.
In a bid to introduce a common strategic planning framework throughout the organisation, the DBU first 
set up a four-year planning cycle with a vision for the organisation and goals for each main domain: sport, 
organisation, commercial and image. All committees and working groups had to use a strategic template 
based on SMART goals. The various chairpersons were then responsible for defining the strategic objectives, 
indicating precise measures to achieve them and defining the strategies. The committees were asked to draft 
a small strategic plan for their working groups using a template in the form of a table with four columns: 1) 
four to six overall strategic objectives; 2) the measures; 3) the targets (or SMART goals) for each of the four 
planning years; 4) summaries of actions.
Redefining the committees, working groups, templates and procedures took up around 20% of a department 
head’s time for a year, but the actual work on developing goals and plans for each of the subdomains did 
not take more than a few days at committee level at the beginning of the planning cycle. The plans were 
then fleshed out at departmental level.
There is no direct relationship between a vision and strategic issues, as issues are domain-specific, whereas 
a vision defines the route of the organisation as a whole. However, it is important for the vision to take 
account of the issues highlighted. 
A vision is broad, typically has a duration of three to five years and can be considered the title or heading 
of the strategic plan for that period. This is why strategic plans are often named after the final year they 
cover, e.g. ‘Vision 2024’. 
	> 4.2. Generating ideas for actions
Once SMART goals have been formulated for each strategic domain, work starts on developing an action 
plan for how to achieve the goals. There are three main ways to identify actions for achieving goals:
1.	Experience within the organisation
2.	Experience from other organisations and external consultants
3.	Specific idea-generating methods such as design thinking, creativity workshops, 
sprints and hackathons
The most commonly used approach is the first: using existing experience within the organisation. Based 
on the internal and external analysis and the SMART goals, the organisation’s experts on the matter in 
question (for example, the marketing and sponsorship experts) sit down and discuss a plan for achieving 
the goal. Different ideas can be generated and then later placed in order of priority (see below).
In some situations it is not sufficient to base the generation of ideas on the expertise and experience within 
the organisation. This is especially true if a new domain is under discussion. In these cases, the second 
approach is more appropriate: leaning on the experiences and benchmarks in other organisations and 
bringing in outside experts. International associations such as UEFA often try to facilitate experience-sharing 
among national associations, such as through UEFA Academy Online, an online platform for sharing football 
resources and experience.
An example of the third approach, making use of specific idea-generation methods in dedicated workshops, 
sprints or hackathons, is the Football Association of Norway’s use of design-thinking methods to improve fan 
experience at the national stadium. The fans’ journey to the stadium was mapped and the so-called pains 
and gains were analysed. This enabled the NFF to identify problems that could be resolved or add elements 
that could create a better experience (Matthews, 2016).
	> 4.3. Prioritising the goals and actions: domain selection and navigation
Once the three analytical stages (situation and performance analysis; external analysis; and internal analysis) 
have been completed and used to generate and record ideas, the strategy team should now find themselves 
with a large number of goals and actions. Since most national associations do not have unlimited resources, 
and since most goals take time and resources to achieve, organisations need to choose which areas to focus 
on (domain selection) and, for each of the areas chosen, which initiatives to invest in (domain navigation). 
Both the domains and initiatives then need to be listed according to their priority.
For this, a tool referred to as an impact/complexity matrix can be used (see Figure 2.6).
Figure 2.6: Impact/complexity matrix
Strategic items/investments: 
investigate/plan further
Not worth it
Low hanging fruits/
quick wins: prioritise
Fill-ins
High
Low
High
Impact
Complexity
Low
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
