70
71
To avoid senior management ‘overload’, there must be a certain level of explicit or implicit delegation to 
staff. Since it is impossible to write detailed decision-making manuals and guidelines for every employee, 
heuristic support systems are needed to make sure that consistent decisions are made at all the various levels.
Strategic management allows national associations to create such support systems. By having a formalised 
and documented strategic plan as a guide, staff at all levels of the organisation are more likely to make better 
decisions on their own but aligned with the management’s intentions.
National associations are unique in nature because, apart from managing various business and commercial 
assets, they are entrusted with developing and promoting football and safeguarding the interests of their 
various member clubs and other entities within a democratic framework. This dichotomy of interests 
creates an inherent risk that the various units and functions within the organisation might not always pull 
in the same direction at the same time. For example, people and units involved in organising competitions 
might act and communicate in ways that prove counterproductive to what other units (such as grassroots 
development) are doing.
	> 1.3. Employee motivation and purpose
As will be developed further in Chapter 3, organisations consist of people. And while people can be motivated 
by rewards and money, that is not the whole story. Another important aspect of employee motivation is 
purpose, i.e. knowing why they are doing what they are doing and understanding why it is important. In 
the strategy formulation process, the organisation links specific activities to desired results and thereby 
provides an explanation for why the organisation has chosen the initiatives it has and why resources have 
been allocated the way they have. If the logic is communicated to and understood by employees, they have 
a higher degree of purpose which leads to greater motivation.
National 
association
Elite 
vs 
grassroots
Men’s
vs
 women’s
National teams 
vs 
leagues/clubs
Futsal 
vs
 football
Figure 2.1: Different parts of a national association pulling in different directions 
	> 2. Introducing a strategic management system
Strategic management systems are relatively easy to introduce. They do not require a lot of investment in 
terms of capital, infrastructure or technical know-how. All that is needed is support from the organisation’s 
senior management. In the case of a national association, this would be its executive committee or board, 
its president, and its general secretary or CEO. However, it might take a few years to find a system that truly 
fits the organisation and its operational cycles, usually the period of time between presidential elections or 
major competitions.
One reason why senior managers at some national associations may be reluctant to adopt a more structured 
strategic management system is a perception that if the organisation fails to meet its stated goals in the short 
term, this will be treated as a failure on their part. This perceived risk is based on a simplistic and misunderstood 
approach to management. Many great business leaders and managers have had to present results to their 
boards and shareholders that have been below expectations and not met the initial goals. No strategic planning 
process, no matter how thoroughly prepared and well executed it may be, can always foresee changes to 
internal and external environments that might affect the original plans. A strategic management system 
should therefore allow for contingency plans to mitigate a new threat, or even exploit a new opportunity.
The fact that a strategic management system is not difficult to establish does not mean that the resulting 
strategic plans and actions will be easy to implement. As will be described in Section 5, strategic decisions 
can encounter resistance and must be accompanied by appropriate support systems. Shilbury and Ferkins 
(2011) argue that one of the main challenges faced by national associations when developing strategic 
management systems is the fact that they are moving from a ‘volunteer-reliant culture’ to one striving to 
deliver sports services in a more professional and ‘business-like’ manner. They argue that this transition from 
amateur to professional governance can be met with resistance as some national associations struggle to 
strike the right balance between paid staff and volunteers. This is further reflected in the ways that national 
associations apply strategic thinking and assigning strategic roles. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to 
deal in detail with the politics of change and change management in national associations, so we will limit 
ourselves to describing the functions and elements of a generic strategic management system.
	> 2.1. Overview of the elements of a strategic management system
Strategic management systems typically: 
1.	monitor and analyse the organisation’s internal and external situation;
2.	formulate goals, objectives and action plans;
3.	allocate resources and responsibilities and control performance.
While this varies from one organisation to another, ideally a national association should adopt a system in 
which its strategic plans are reviewed every year and the plans are updated, so the association always has 
three-to-five-year targets.
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
