84
85
It is important for a PEST analysis to be domain-specific, which typically also means that it should be limited 
geographically. For example, looking at the hypothetical trends in Table 2.6, immigration, integration of 
minorities and economic disparities may be major issues in some countries but not be at all relevant in others.
Political
Technological
Market orientation
Social media platforms
Immigration and integration
Multimedia and virtual reality 
Political correctness
Big data and data analytics
Corporate social responsibility
Internet of things
Sustainability
Blockchain
Economic
Social
Disparities between high- and low-growth areas
Ageing population
Public spending cuts
Greater global awareness and exposure 
Reduced contributions from national lotteries
Constraints regarding schedule of training sessions 
because of parents’ own working schedules
Declines in disposable income
Inflation of national currency
	> 3.2.4. Deriving implications: opportunities, threats, strategic issues and options
When looking at an organisation’s domains, its KSFs and the overall PEST factors affecting them, strategic 
analysts may be capable of formulating preliminary actions that take advantage of any opportunities or react 
to any threats. It is important that ideas for both types of action be recorded and fed into a repository of 
issues and options for potential strategies.
	> 3.3. Internal analysis
A national association’s ability to efficiently execute its strategic plans depends on its strengths and weaknesses, 
the resources at its disposal and the capabilities of its staff. As discussed above, national associations should 
therefore carry out an objective appraisal of these, using the tools described below.
Table 2.6: An example of some hypothetical PEST trends
	> 3.3.1. Identification of resources and capabilities
Even the most carefully designed and well-articulated goals may amount to nothing if they are not grounded 
in reality. Unrealistic goals can sometimes do an organisation more harm than good, leading to a loss of faith 
and goodwill among internal and external stakeholders because the organisation is seen as running the risk 
of engaging in projects that it does not have the resources or capabilities to carry through.
For this reason, before starting on a strategy, national associations must take stock of the resources and 
capabilities at their disposal, i.e. those that they can readily access and control. This is usually straightforward, 
and most associations will already have a reasonable overview of what is available (or will be available) to 
them over the strategic management timeframe, without the need for a formal process. 
A national association’s resources can usually be grouped together in four categories – financial resources, 
tangible assets, intangible assets and human resources, as illustrated in Table 2.7. Some resources can be 
measured directly using various metrics. The national association’s accounting, financial reporting, budgeting 
and information systems will determine the number of metrics and how detailed they are.
Financial 
resources
Tangible 
assets
Intangible 
assets
Human 
resources
Examples
- Cash reserves 
- Future funding
- Revenue 
generation
- Borrowing 
capacity
- Land 
- Buildings 
- Facilities 
- Equipment 
- Brands 
- Trademarks
- Reputation 
- Know-how 
- Patents 
- Databases and
contact 
information
- Staff skills and 
capabilities 
- Staff’s potential to 
learn and produce 
ideas
Measurable 
indicators
- Revenues
- Gross profit
- Credit rating
- Cash flows
- Value of 
tangible assets
- Size and 
capacity of 
facilities
- Value of 
intangible 
assets
- Budgets for 
development 
of systems and 
know-how
- Social media 
engagement 
- Staff’s 
qualifications
- Pay rates
- Staff turnover
Table 2.7: Typical national association resources
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
