80
81
	> 3.2. External analysis
Just like organisations in other sectors, national associations operate in an increasingly complex environment 
and are influenced by dozens of diverse factors, many of which are interconnected. Therefore, as discussed 
earlier, effective strategies can only be formulated with a profound understanding of the organisation’s 
external environment and the various influences that may favourably or adversely affect outcomes.
Table 2.3: Situation and performance analysis in practice: the UEFA Grow framework
Performance
Participation
Facilities
Revenue
Number of elite teams 
by age group
Competition structures
Number of 
performance coaches, 
officials and volunteers
Information from elite 
clubs & academies
Information on talent 
pathways
Participation across age 
groups
Number of 
participation coaches, 
officials and volunteers
Number, cost and 
impact of participation 
programmes
Participant and non-
participant attitudes 
and motivations
Information from clubs, 
academies & schools
Number and type of 
facilities per region/ 
area by type
Demand for facilities 
per region/area by type
Utilisation of existing 
facilities
Planned facility 
maintenance/ 
development 
Value of public funding
Total sports 
sponsorships & % 
football
Total football broadcast 
and media rights
OTT & digital revenues
Matchday revenues 
(including ticketing)
ROI/SROI assessments
Existing NA assets
Engagement
Governance 
& regulation
Women’s football
Enablers
Social media 
engagement (follows/ 
likes/group members)
Number of members 
of the national team 
official supporters club
Data from recent 
football image research 
(e.g. surveys)
Compliance check 
against UEFA Good 
Governance Framework
Internal regulations/ 
guides
NA handbook
Memberships of 
social & international 
regulatory bodies
Women’s participation 
across age groups
% of workforce and 
organisation that is 
female
Number of licensed/ 
professionalised clubs
Average number of 
attendees per women’s 
elite match
Previous budget(s)
Organisational charts & 
decision-making bodies 
e.g. Board, Standing 
Committees, etc.
Number of FTEs per 
department and roles
Job descriptions
Recruitment/hiring 
plans
KPI trackers
Calendar of events
	> 3.2.1. Domain mapping
Good strategic management relies on decision-makers fully understanding the external environment: knowing 
what is needed to be successful and being able to identify trends and threats, etc. As mentioned previously, 
national associations are complex organisations. They are complex in their internal structure because of their 
democratic and political nature, but they are also complex in terms of the external environments in which 
they operate.
Many national associations are relatively small organisations, with an average of 30 to 70 employees. 
However, national associations are active in many more areas than other similarly sized companies. A typical 
company with 50 employees and annual turnover of €5m would not normally be active in more than one 
business area, but national associations have to operate in perhaps a dozen or so different areas. Because 
not all these areas are markets, they are normally referred to as ‘domains’, rather than ‘businesses’, ‘business 
areas’ or ‘business units’.
A ‘domain’ refers to an area of the association’s activities where it is possible to identify an exchange of 
goods, services or money between the association and a defined group of stakeholders. Some of these 
domains are easy to identify and the exchange process is clearly understood. In the sponsorship domain, for 
example, the association sells space that it owns or controls, such as in stadiums and on websites, to generate 
funds. Here, the stakeholder is a customer exchanging money for an advertising service, which is a defined 
sponsorship package involving clear rights and obligations. Other domains are equally straightforward, such 
as refereeing and stadiums. Here, the service and the stakeholder are easily identified, and the exchange 
process is simple to understand. 
However, other domains, such as youth development, are much more complex. The first difficulty lies in 
understanding the service or the value that is being created. We normally understand youth development 
as the process of giving more young people the opportunity to play football and providing talented young 
players with adequate training and career prospects in football. So, the service is football club membership. 
But who is the stakeholder, and what is the exchange process? The primary stakeholder is the young player, 
who may already be playing for a club or may wish to start playing. The player is involved in an exchange 
with a club, so the club is also a stakeholder. Local government, schools and parents are also parties that 
can influence youth development and have a stake in it, so they too are stakeholders.
When national associations want to understand their environment as part of their external analysis, mapping 
the domains in which they are (or could be) active is an important starting point. There are no templates or 
blueprints for domain mapping in national associations, but typically an association will define its domains as 
8 to 15 main areas of activity in which it works to collect funds, generate revenue, perform in international 
competitions, increase the number of active players or improve stakeholders’ football experience. A framework 
for describing the most relevant domains (and the related subdomains) of a national association has been 
developed by UEFA Grow and an example is shown in Table 2.4.
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
