94
95
	> 5.4. Designing reporting and control systems
It is one thing for an organisation to define the budget for its various units, and it is another to ask those 
units to report back to the financial controller, HR department or general secretary on the progress of 
activities, revenue generation and spending. Different associations have different traditions, requirements 
and standards for reporting. Some have very formal, structured rules, so that every month or quarter, the 
cost and revenue centres must report back on budget progress and will be controlled and receive feedback. 
Other associations have no reporting system, and do everything at year-end when the consolidated results 
are calculated. The advantage of a structured system is that if something is not going according to plan, it 
can be discovered early and corrective actions taken. The disadvantage is that it costs more to run. Reporting 
and control systems do not necessarily need to limit themselves to financial measures; they could also be 
extended to include reporting back on and controlling strategic goals and objectives.
	> 5.5. Defining individual tasks, responsibilities and incentive systems
Ultimately organisations need to translate the overall organisational goals into individual tasks and 
responsibilities. This process is often referred to as MBO, or management by objectives and involves individual 
managers and employees being given, or negotiating, a number of annual objectives in different areas. These 
objectives are linked to the strategic objectives of that unit. Depending on how the system is implemented, 
the employee will discuss their progress periodically with their line manager, and corrective action will be 
taken if progress is not according to plan. Bonuses or other incentive systems could be linked to results.
	> 6. Conclusion
The approach to strategic management that has been described in this chapter will hopefully serve as inspiration 
for any national association that is looking to modify its existing systems. Every organisation is different, 
and it is important for processes, formats and timing to be suited to the particular organisational context. 
However, research has shown that the chances of success increase if an organisation defines its goals based 
on analytical insights into the internal and external environment, sets out the path to achieving these goals, 
and allocates the right amount of time and effort to putting the strategies into practice.
Much has been written on the subject of strategic planning and analysis, both in sport and other industries. 
The same basic methodologies apply to all types of organisation, even if the internal and external environments 
have different dynamics, but the fundamentals on which good strategies are based remain the same: (1) a 
profound understanding of the environment in which the organisation operates; (2) an objective appraisal 
of the organisation’s resources and capabilities; (3) the formulation of clear goals and objectives; and (4) 
effective implementation.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
•	DFB.de (n.d.). Verbandsstruktur, das DFB-Präsidium. Retrieved on 27 December 2020 from https://www.
dfb.de/verbandsstruktur/praesidium 
•	Doran, G. T. (1981). There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management’s goals and objectives. Management 
Review, 70(11), 35–36.
•	Draebye, M., & Palmieri, A. (2017). The Danish Football Association (DBU) Case A. SDA Bocconi.
•	Draebye, M., & Raju, P. N. (2012). Strategic management of sports governing bodies. Greyhouse 
Knowledge.
•	Fawtrust.cymru (nd). Purpose, vision & goals. Retrieved on 27 December 2020 from www.fawtrust.
cymru/who-we-are/purpose-vision-goals 
•	Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: an introduction to theory and 
research. Addison-Wesley.
•	Grant, R. (2019). Contemporary strategy analysis (9th ed.). Wiley.
•	Kikulis, L. (2000). Continuity and change in governance and decision making in national sports 
organisations: institutional explanations. Journal of Sports Management, 14(4), 293–320. 
•	Kraljic, P. (1983). Purchasing Must Become Supply Management. Retrieved from www.hbr.org/1983/09/
purchasing-must-become-supply-management
•	Matthews, T. (2016, 30 June – 2 July). Designing Football Rituals for Heightened Fan Experiences 
[Conference presentation]. The Beautiful Game: The Poetics and Aesthetics of Soccer in Transnational 
Perspective. Basel, Switzerland.
•	Shilbury, D., & Ferkins, L. (2011). Professionalisation, sport governance and strategic capability. 
Managing Leisure, 16, 108–127. 
•	Tawse, A., & Tabesh, P. (2020). Strategy implementation: a review and an introductory framework. 
European Management Journal.  
•	UEFA (2019). Together for the Future of Football: UEFA Strategy 2019–2024. Retrieved on 29 October 2020 
from www.uefa.com/MultimediaFiles/Download/uefaorg/General/02/59/06/32/2590632_DOWNLOAD.pdf
•	UEFA (2020). GROW, Leading and Supporting the Growth of European Football. Printed Manual.
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
