74
75
The analytical model is divided into three distinct logical steps: 1) strategic analysis, 2) strategy formulation 
(generation and choice) and 3) strategic planning, communication and implementation. As illustrated in 
Figure 2.4, performance measurement and control provides a feedback loop from the strategic planning, 
communication and implementation step into the initial analysis. In practical terms, this is the basis for a 
yearly (or even quarterly) strategy review cycle.
The first step in the analytical model is strategic analysis, and the starting point for this is to analyse the 
national association’s past performance. This is sometimes referred to as situation and performance analysis. 
It is important to start with past performance because strategy should not ignore the association’s current 
situation. If, for example, an association is suffering from a lack of good sporting results at elite level, that 
issue must be addressed in the strategy formulation process. If it is not, there is a risk that the strategy will 
be detached from the relevant context. 
Once the association’s current situation has been assessed, the external analysis is performed as part of step 1. 
The purpose of the external analysis is to identify the relevant stakeholders and their preferences and interests. 
This is important because strategies cannot work without this information. External analysis also serves to 
identify trends, opportunities and threats.
The third part of step 1 is the internal analysis, where the association’s strengths and weaknesses are assessed. 
This involves looking at the resources and capabilities the organisation possesses or controls. This is not to be 
confused with the overall performance assessment carried out in the first step: one looks at the performance, 
while the other focuses on potential. 
All three types of analysis in step 1 involve identifying insights and ideas for how the organisation can improve, 
which come into play in the options stage.
Figure 2.4: Key elements of a strategic management system
Strategic analysis
Strategic planning, 
communication & 
implementation 
Strategy formulation (generation & choice)
External 
analysis
Strategy options
Vision 
& 
SMART goals
Planning, 
communication & 
implementation of 
the chosen strategy
Situation & 
performance 
analysis
Domain selection 
strategy 
(choice of focus)
Domain navigation 
strategy 
(choice of initiatives)
Internal 
analysis
Performance measurement & control
During the second of the three steps – strategy formulation – SMART goals (described in Section 4.1) are 
defined along with initiatives to meet them. As will be described in detail below, goals are domain-specific. 
A domain is an area within the national association that is relevant to the organisation’s mission. As small, 
complex organisations, national associations cannot focus on improving all domains all the time. Part of the 
strategy formulation process is therefore to choose which domains to focus on. We refer to this as the domain 
selection strategy. Then, the association needs to define a set of initiatives aimed at achieving the goals for 
each of the chosen domains. We refer to the choice of initiatives as domain navigation.
In the final step, covering strategic planning, communication and implementation, the strategic plan is drafted 
and communicated, resources are allocated to the initiatives chosen and performance measurement and 
control systems are designed. As seen from Figure 2.4, these control systems then feed back to the situation 
and performance analysis so that the process can be started over again and the strategy updated if results 
do not meet expectations.
	> 3. Strategic analysis
As discussed above, strategic management by national associations involves formulating goals, then designing 
initiatives and allocating resources to successfully achieve them.
A strategic management system will work best if these goals and initiatives are based on a profound 
understanding of the association’s external environment and an impartial appraisal of its internal resources 
and capabilities. Many strategies fail because they do not properly take into account the various internal 
and external factors that could adversely affect their outcomes. However, like organisations in other areas, 
national associations can use a structured and thorough process of analysis to arrive at a useful understanding 
of the environment in which they operate.
Strategic analysis can be thought of as the groundwork that needs to be carried out before effective strategies 
can be formulated and put into practice. This analysis comprises four broad and interconnected parts – 
situation and performance analysis, external analysis, internal analysis and the potential identification of ideas 
for strategies. This section introduces these parts and the various tools that can be used for each of them.
	> 3.1. Situation and performance analysis
The starting point for any strategy management (or review) process is an assessment of the association’s 
current situation, within the broader context of its overarching goals laid down in the association’s mission 
statement and statement of values, which are described further on.
Situation and performance analysis helps management to define the overall scope of the strategy formulation 
process, in terms of both the issues it needs to address and the duration of the resulting strategic plan. It 
involves defining the organisational context in which the strategy formulation process needs to operate, 
analysing the association’s past performance and studying the problems and challenges that need to be solved.
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
