88
89
An analysis of strengths and weaknesses can also be used to assess where internal development is required. 
Areas that are important for success where the national association is weak need to be addressed, and there 
are usually two ways of doing so:
1.	Building capabilities internally: national associations can invest in building facilities, training 
employees, developing procedures, etc.
2.	Outsourcing the task: where the required expertise lies outside the core competences of the 
national association, or where internal capabilities cannot easily be built, associations may choose to 
outsource activities to third parties. For example, it is common to outsource travel logistics to travel 
agencies that are in a better position to perform that task.
All ideas for action that result from the internal analysis should be recorded and fed into a repository of issues 
and options for potential strategies.
	> 4. Strategy formulation (generation and choice)
A strategy is a set of actions and decisions aimed at achieving a specific goal. Although the strategic analysis 
carried out so far does not have to include ideas for goals and actions, such ideas might already have been 
generated as a natural consequence of insights and analysis, just not in a structured manner. For example, 
if a specific stakeholder group and a KSF were analysed in connection with women’s football and certain 
barriers were revealed, it would be natural to generate ideas for initiatives to break down these barriers.
A structured approach to strategy formulation follows three logical steps: 
1.	Formulating the vision and SMART goals
2.	Generating ideas for achieving the goals 
3.	Prioritising the goals and actions
	> 4.1. Formulating the vision and SMART goals
It is not always easy to differentiate between a national association’s mission, vision and goals.
A mission, or mission statement, is a description of the organisation’s reason for being, i.e. a description of its 
purpose and area of activity. Mission statements are timeless and very rarely changed or rewritten. An example 
of a mission statement is UEFA’s: “Our mission is to ensure football is the most played, trusted, competitive 
and engaging sport” (UEFA, 2019). The statement clearly defines the area in which the organisation operates 
and also summarises the principles on which it bases its activities. Mission statements help organisations to 
communicate their purpose to internal and external stakeholders.
A vision is different. A vision is a statement of intent which is valid for a specific time period. When national 
associations talk about their ‘Vision 2024’ or ‘Vision 2026’, they are talking about what they want to achieve 
by that point in time. When an association develops a vision, it develops a statement and a programme of 
intent. Doing that is in itself a daunting task, but communicating that vision can be even more daunting. 
There is, however, no alternative to developing and communicating a vision if a national association wants 
to increase its chances of putting its resources to the best use in order to accomplish its mission. At the 
same time, a vision statement is not normally sufficiently precise to give direction to a national association 
throughout a planning period, merely serving as a framework for setting out more detailed goals. 
Goals can be a lot of things. A generic goal (e.g. ‘we want to develop youth participation’) is normally not 
specific enough to build a strategy around, because the organisation will not know exactly what initiative 
needs to be launched to achieve the goal. For this reason, strategists often apply the concept of SMART 
goals. A SMART goal is specific, measurable, attainable, relevant and time-bound. For example, ‘By 2024, 
we aim to have 20,000 registered players in the 9 to 16 age group’. SMART goals are an excellent starting 
point when developing an action plan.
There are various versions of the SMART (or SMARTER) concept, which was first advocated by Doran (1981), 
but they all describe the desirable attributes of an organisation’s goals using the SMART/SMARTER mnemonic. 
Table 2.9 shows variations.
In its simplest form, a SMART goal needs to be: 
1.	Ambitious but realistic
2.	Measurable (hence also time-bound)
3.	Relevant (i.e. aligned with the association’s overall strategy and mission)
Letter
Key term
Subsidiary terms
S
Specific
Significant, stretching, simple
M
Measurable
Meaningful, motivational, manageable
A
Attainable
Appropriate, achievable, agreed, assignable, actionable, ambitious, 
aligned, aspirational
R
Relevant
Realistic, resourced, resonant
T
Time-bound
Time-oriented, time-framed, timed, time-based, time-boxed, timely, 
time-specific, timetabled, time-limited, trackable, tangible
E
Evaluate
Ethical, excitable, enjoyable, engaging, ecological
R
Re-evaluate
Rewarded, reassess, revisit, recordable, rewarding, reaching
Table 2.9: Formulating SMART(ER) objectives
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
