78
79
Financial
Operational
Amount of funding received (from government, 
FIFA, UEFA or others)
Number of clubs, teams and players (per age 
group and gender)
Funding as a percentage of total funds available 
per source
Number of matches played
TV rights revenues
Number of referees
Other media rights revenues
Number of course participants
Tournament fees
Number of volunteers
Sponsorship revenues
Number of fan club members
Ticket revenues
Ranking of national teams and club results in UEFA 
competitions
Course and training revenues
Spectator numbers (per league and national team)
Revenue per employee
Number of category 1, 2, 3 and 4 stadiums
Net income
Number of winter training venues
Number of mini-pitches at schools
Internal
Stakeholder satisfaction
Number of administrative employees
Employee turnover
Number of technical employees
Public approval rates
Formal educational level of employees (number of 
employees with high school diplomas, bachelor’s 
and master’s degrees, etc.)
Number of complaints registered
Number of female managers
Number of criminal investigations involving 
the football community (coaches, players, 
club owners, etc.)
Number of training days completed by 
administrative staff
Sponsor turnover
Number of new ideas and initiatives
Journalists’ level of satisfaction
Government and local authorities’ 
level of satisfaction
Number of participants in the general meeting
Table 2.2: Performance indicators typically used by national associations
	> 3.1.3. Problems and challenges
It is important to identify and highlight the problems and challenges currently faced by the national association 
in order to prioritise the way they are handled according to their importance and urgency. If challenges are 
critical and require an urgent response, the strategy formulation process should focus on designing action 
plans that result in short-term responses. It is not uncommon for certain overriding issues to drive the strategy 
formulation process or to require the creation of ad hoc processes specifically designed to address those 
issues as a priority.
For example, an acute financial crisis in the economy at large that forces sponsors and other financial 
contributors to withdraw or reduce their contributions to grassroots programmes might require an urgent 
response that will drive the rest of the strategy formulation process. As discussed above, establishing the 
organisational context, analysing the association’s performance and identifying problems and challenges will 
make it easier to clarify the scope of the strategy in terms of the issues that need to be addressed and the 
time horizon within which to do so.
A typical strategic management system involves strategic plans with a defined time horizon of three to five 
years and annual reviews of those plans. Under normal circumstances, a national association will not be 
required to adjust the time horizons. However, dramatic external events (such as the COVID-19 pandemic) 
may trigger challenges that require urgent plans with very short timeframes (sometimes as short as 3 to 6 
months), while other goals might require a longer-term strategy (e.g. a 10-to-15-year plan).
In all three cases – short, medium and longer-term plans – it is extremely important for the strategy formulation 
process to have a clearly defined time horizon, as different horizons require the use of different tools and 
analytical approaches. For example, long-term plans typically require an analysis of long-term demographic, 
economic and technological trends, whereas medium and short-term plans can be based on the current 
situation.
Table 2.3 shows an example of situation and performance analysis in practice. Once the scope of the 
strategy formulation process has been defined – and ideas for future strategy options have perhaps already 
been identified – the external and internal environments need to be analysed with a view to choosing and 
formulating effective strategies.

The UEFA Grow framework recommends that national associations analyse their performance in 
eight different areas: performance; participation; facilities; revenue; engagement; governance and 
regulation; women’s football; and enablers. Below is a (non-exhaustive) list of performance indicators 
for the eight areas.
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
