76
77
	> 3.1.1. Organisational mission and values
The ultimate purpose of strategy is to help organisations to fulfil their mission by continuously improving 
their performance in mission-related areas. As strategies are therefore formulated in terms of the mission, 
understanding what the mission is and what the core values are is the starting point for any situation and 
performance analysis.
	> 3.1.2. Organisational context
As part of the situation and performance analysis, the management team needs to clearly identify whether 
the strategic management processes will encompass either the whole of the national association, including 
its member organisations or only specific organisational functions and units, because clearly establishing the 
boundaries will help to eliminate everything that is not immediately relevant thereby making the strategy 
formulation more focused.
For example, if one of the association’s key objectives is to improve football’s positioning and reputation, the 
strategies and plans intended to meet that objective will require the involvement of staff in such areas as the 
competitions, grassroots development, communications and marketing units. By placing these organisational 
boundaries during the situation and performance analysis, the cross-functional analysis can be conducted 
without involving units that are not relevant to the question in hand.
The organisational context is typically determined by the structure of the organisation itself. Table 2.1, from 
the German Football Association (DFB.de, n.d.), shows the structure of the association’s presidential board. 
The organisational context for the president and the general secretary is of course the association as a whole, 
with all its various activities and domains, but strategic planning could also be conducted at unit level. For 
example, the unit reporting to the vice-president with responsibility for refereeing could use the strategic 
management framework to develop its own unit-specific objectives and strategies.
The association’s past and current performance in various areas provides a good indication of its situation 
and helps to identify the issues that need to be addressed. However, situation and performance analysis in 
national associations is more complex than in profit-maximising companies. Since the purpose of most of 
these companies is to maximise shareholder value, performance can simply be measured in terms of economic 
and financial results – profits, return on investment, return on equity, etc.
In contrast, because most national associations are not in the business of maximising profits, performance 
must be evaluated in terms of the association’s stated purpose and goals. The overall goals of a national 
association are usually articulated in its mission statement and reiterated through various other operational 
documents such as strategic plans and annual reports. The strategy formulation or review process must start 
with a thorough analysis of whether those goals are being achieved, and how efficiently. 
DFB presidential board
DFB president
First vice-president (amateur/regional associations)
First vice-president (deputy spokesman for the DFL presidential board)
Treasurer
Vice-president (match operations and football development)
Vice-president (CEO of the executive board of DFL Deutsche Fußball Liga GmbH)
Vice-president (second deputy spokesman for the DFL presidential board)
Vice-president (DFL vice-president)
Representative for the DFL GmbH (consultative)
Vice-president for youth football and refereeing
Vice-president for qualifications and integration
Vice-president for equality, women’s and girls’ football
Vice-president for FSR and the DFB foundations
General secretary
Representative for the national team (consultative)
Sports manager of the youth and talent promotion programme (consultative)
Secretary for marketing, communication and CSR of DFB EURO GmbH (consultative)
Honorary president

Situation and performance analysis typically involves studying various key performance indicators (KPIs) 
and comparing them with targets or previous results. National associations can also benchmark their 
results against those of similar organisations to get a clearer picture of their relative performance.
Table 2.2 lists a number of typical KPIs that national associations can use as part of their situation and 
performance analysis. Related indicators are usually grouped together in categories to provide a better 
understanding of how the association is doing in each of those areas. In this example, the categories used 
are financial, operational, internal and stakeholder satisfaction. While the list is not exhaustive, it offers ideas 
as to how an association could keep track of its performance and therefore be in a better position to assess 
the various problems and challenges it faces.
Table 2.1: Structure of the presidential board of the German Football Association
CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT
HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT
