                                             CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



Table 1.3 shows how FIFA and UEFA’s responsibilities overlap.

 FIFA’s exclusive areas                        Overlapping areas             UEFA’s exclusive areas
 of responsibility                             of responsibility             of responsibility

                                                                             Competitions between
                                               Promotion and                 representative national teams at
 Laws of the Game (IFAB)
                                               development of football       European level (UEFA European
                                                                             Football Championship, etc.)

                                                                             Club competitions at European
                                               Political matters relating
 International match calendar                                                level (UEFA Champions League,
                                               to national associations
                                                                             UEFA Europa League, etc.)

 Competitions between representative
                                                                             Club licensing and financial
 national teams at world level (FIFA           Refereeing matters
                                                                             fair play
 World Cup, etc.)

 Club competitions at world level (FIFA
                                               Football kit                  Licensing of coaches
 Club World Cup)

 Status and transfer of players                Safety and security

 Relationship with the International
                                               Fight against doping
 Olympic Committee

 Player intermediaries/agents                  Fight against match-fixing

 Match agents (organisers)


  Table 1.3: FIFA and UEFA’s regulatory responsibilities


> 2.4. How FIFA is organised

FIFA’s supreme legislative body is the FIFA Congress (FIFA, September 2020, Articles 25 to 32), which comprises
representatives of all 211 member associations. The FIFA Congress, is in particular, responsible for deciding
who should host FIFA World Cup tournaments.

Together with the FIFA president, the FIFA Council (FIFA, September 2020, Articles 33 to 34) is the organisation’s
key decision-making body. It was established following an extensive reform process in order to clarify and
improve the nature and quality of decision-making at FIFA. An Extraordinary Congress (FIFA.com, 26 February
2016) voted to disband the 24-member FIFA Executive Committee and replace it with the FIFA Council, which
FIFA describes as “a non-executive, supervisory and strategic body that sets the vision for FIFA and global
football” (FIFA.com, n.d. (d)).




                                                       49
