HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT



Football is one of the few truly worldwide phenomena. It is also one of the most organised, structured as it
is in the form of a global hierarchical pyramid.

Our first purpose here is to describe the organisational structure of world football, focusing first on the
International Football Association Board (IFAB), which regulates the rules of football, then on the roles of
FIFA and UEFA (the game’s world and European governing bodies respectively), and finally on the other five
continental football confederations – the Asian Football Confederation (AFC), the Confederación Sudamericana
de Fútbol (CONMEBOL), the Confédération Africaine de Football (CAF), the Confederation of North, Central
American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF) and the Oceania Football Confederation (OFC).

Second, we will explain how football’s organisational structure has enabled its global expansion, examine
how the system continues to evolve in order to take account of new stakeholders in the football ecosystem
and, finally, identify the critical challenges facing the successful management of that ecosystem.

The first uniform football regulations were agreed in England in 1863, when The Football Association (The FA)
was formed. The IFAB then convened for the first time on 2 June 1886 (IFAB, n.d.). It was to draw up a uniform
international code, reflecting the need for a consistent set of rules to allow the development of international
football between the four ‘home nations’ of the United Kingdom, via The FA, the Scottish Football Association (SFA),
the Football Association of Wales (FAW) and what is now the Irish Football Association (IFA) in Northern Ireland.

FIFA was founded in 1904 and joined the IFAB in 1913. So, the formation of the IFAB, and later FIFA,
established an international dimension to football’s development very early in the sport’s history, as well
as an interdependence between national associations and international stakeholders. This relationship also
facilitated the development of a particular feature of sporting competition: the release of players to national
teams by clubs as a form of solidarity. This made it possible to organise parallel club and national team
competitions through a system of cooperation for mutual benefit between clubs, national associations,
regional confederations and FIFA.

It is important to note that, as football developed, shadowed by the growth of its associated business
stakeholders’ activities in everything from sports apparel to media broadcasting, it did so within the framework
of a managed global ecosystem. The metaphor of a biological environment is a good one, since the global
football ecosystem evolves as new stakeholders emerge and needs to be kept in balance in order to bring
maximum benefits to all the stakeholders.

FIFA sits at the apex of this global ecosystem, above the six broadly regional confederations, which it recognises
(FIFA, September 2020, Articles 22 and 23), although they are not actually FIFA members. Each of these
confederations organises its own national team and club competitions for its individual national associations,
which are also members of FIFA. The confederations organise their own leagues, which are contested by
clubs from the various countries.




                                                        42
