                                             CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



> 1. The role of the IFAB

At the heart of football’s status as the pre-eminent global sport lies the fact that the game is governed by
a set of playing rules that are easy to understand and universal in their application. It is this combination
of simplicity and universality, combined with the strong athletic appeal of the game itself, that has helped
football to become the world’s leading participation and spectator sport, played and watched in every corner
of the globe. It is this same combination that drives the interest of key commercial stakeholders, such as
media businesses and sports apparel companies. The efficient management of the rules of the game has
therefore played a critical role not only in the development of football as a participation sport, but also in
its commercial success, which then allows football’s various governing bodies to redistribute revenue to the
game’s grassroots in the form of solidarity payments.

The rules of football are the preserve of the IFAB and are set out in the Laws of the Game (IFAB, 2020). Any
national association can propose rule changes, but a three-quarters majority of IFAB members is required for
any amendment to the Laws of the Game to be passed. Historically, the IFAB has introduced rule changes with
great care and discretion, so the Laws of the Game have evolved conservatively over time. One example of
a successful, and very influential, innovation was the introduction of the back-pass rule in 1992, which was
introduced in order to penalise overly defensive play, while a more recent innovation was the introduction
of video assistant referees (VAR) in 2018 (FIFA.com, 3 March 2018).

A key point to note is that IFAB decisions on the Laws of the Game can also have other implications. For
example, in some other sports (such as rugby union and basketball) physical advertising on the field of play
is allowed, whereas football’s Law 1 (The Field of Play) specifically bans advertising on the pitch. In football,
the game itself is seen as sacrosanct, and therefore the primary consideration. This approach – the primacy
of sporting imperatives over commercial interests – is articulated in Article 2(1)(g) of the UEFA Statutes (UEFA,
July 2020), which states that one of UEFA’s objectives is “to ensure that sporting values always prevail over
commercial interests”. This distinguishes the governance of football from the more overtly commercial
approach adopted in some other sports.

In summary, the effective governance and custodianship of the Laws of the Game by the IFAB has played a
critical role in football’s status as the pre-eminent global sport, and the way this governance role is managed
has significant commercial implications.

> 2. The role of FIFA
FIFA is a not-for-profit association headquartered in Zurich and governed by the Swiss Civil Code. It has 211
member associations (FIFA.com, n.d. (a)), each of which has one vote at the FIFA Congress, regardless of its
population size or economic power. Its overarching goal, as enshrined in its statutes, is:

       “To improve the game of football constantly and promote it globally in the light of its unifying,
       educational, cultural and humanitarian values, particularly through youth and development programmes”
       (FIFA, September 2020, Article 2(a))

Developing the game of football worldwide is therefore FIFA’s primary strategic objective.




                                                      45
