                                             CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



clubs. This enables UEFA to maximise broadcast, sponsorship and commercial revenues on behalf of the clubs
and their national associations. By way of example, UEFA generated total revenue of €3.86bn in 2018/19, of
which 85.8% was derived from the sale of broadcasting rights. While most of this revenue was distributed
to participating clubs, €275.2m was paid to national associations and non-participating clubs in the form of
solidarity payments and contributions to development/education programmes (UEFA, 2020a, pp. 4, 5 and
9). As this demonstrates, UEFA’s exploitation of commercial property rights is considerable, which is critical
in helping UEFA to meet its solidarity responsibilities towards member associations and the grassroots of
European football.

Led by UEFA, the key stakeholders in European football continue to discuss how the format of the UEFA
club competitions might evolve for the 2024–27 competition cycle. At the time of writing, no firm decisions
had been made in this regard.

> 3.4. UEFA’s football development role

One of UEFA’s key objectives is to develop football all over Europe. One of the ways in which it achieves this
is by organising competitions for women’s football, youth football (for men and women alike) and futsal.
These are all loss-making, with the cost of running them being underwritten by UEFA. In addition, UEFA also
funds very significant amounts of football development activity by its member associations across Europe.

The HatTrick programme (UEFA.com, n.d. (j)) was launched in 2003 as UEFA’s main football development
vehicle and is funded entirely by the surpluses from UEFA EUROs. Development projects funded by the
programme must (i) help to develop football within UEFA’s territory; (ii) be of common interest to the football
community; and (iii) have a clear functional, educational and sporting purpose. By way of example, the work
of the UEFA Academy is funded by the HatTrick programme.

The HatTrick programme operates in four-season cycles. The fourth HatTrick cycle (2016/17 to 2019/20)
distributed a total of €610.5m to UEFA’s member associations. For the fifth cycle (2020/21 to 2023/24), the
figure will be €775.5m. A particularly powerful benefit of the HatTrick programme has been its multiplier
(or snowball) effect, in terms of encouraging other stakeholders (including governments, local authorities,
sponsors, clubs and FIFA) to provide additional funding for football-related projects (UEFA.com, 8 August 2019).

UEFA has, in particular, made a major commitment to developing women’s football (UEFA.com, n.d. (k)).
For example, in 2019 it launched a women’s football strategy entitled Time for Action, with its plans for
achieving the objectives set out in that strategy being underpinned by HatTrick funding. One of UEFA’s key
strategic objectives in that regard is to double the number of women and girls playing football in its member
associations to 2.5 million by 2024 (UEFA.com, 17 May 2019).

UEFA also seeks to achieve its development objectives through the UEFA Grow programme, in which UEFA
works directly with national associations to help them grow their internal business development capabilities,
so that they can maximise their full potential, both on and off the pitch, as football development organisations
(UEFA.com, n.d. (l)).




                                                      57
