                                               CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



competitions, and the education of players, officials and national association staff. Fourth, UEFA runs its
Respect campaign, which (as the name suggests) promotes respect for integrity, diversity, dignity, players’
health, rules, the referee, opponents and supporters. The Respect logo, which is displayed prominently at all
UEFA competitions, has become one of the most recognisable pieces of branding in European football. At the
beginning of the 2017/18 season, UEFA gave fresh impetus to the Respect programme with the launch of the
#EqualGame campaign, which is designed to promote inclusion and diversity in football (UEFA.com, n.d. (o)).

> 3.7. UEFA’s commitment to social responsibility

As an integral part of society, football has an invaluable role to play in terms of driving social development and
bringing its influence to bear (UEFA.com, n.d. (p)). UEFA operates an extensive portfolio of social responsibility
initiatives through strategic partnerships that strive for zero discrimination and maximum diversity, foster
social integration and reconciliation, and promote active and healthy lifestyles and football for all, as well as
funding a range of football foundations and charitable programmes.

One noteworthy feature of UEFA’s social responsibility strategy is the UEFA Foundation for Children. Established
in 2015 as an independent foundation, it uses sport to support humanitarian projects linked to children’s
rights in areas such as health, education and integration.

> 3.8. A summary of UEFA’s functions and activities

UEFA is European football’s governing body. It is a democratically accountable confederation that represents
the interests of its member associations. It works to develop football in Europe, particularly through the HatTrick
programme, organises highly successful national team and club competitions, and commercially exploits UEFA
properties so that it can distribute revenue to other stakeholders in European football through the solidarity
principle, which also allows it to subsidise the development of a number of other events, including youth,
women’s, amateur and futsal competitions. It plays a key role in promoting the development of home-grown
players in its member associations through its rules on locally trained players.

It has various other miscellaneous regulatory functions, as well as a range of wider campaigning functions, which
include combating discrimination and promoting diversity and inclusion in football via the Respect/#EqualGame
initiatives, as well as in the corporate responsibility sector.

Finally, it regulates the European football industry and promotes financial sustainability and integrity through
its club licensing system and financial fair play rules. UEFA set out its strategy for successfully operationalising
these activities in Together for the Future of Football: UEFA Strategy 2019–2024 (UEFA, 2019).

> 4. The roles of the AFC, CAF, CONCACAF, CONMEBOL and the OFC

As previously explained, FIFA sits at the apex of world football, and beneath it lie the six regional confederations:
UEFA, the AFC, CAF, CONCACAF, CONMEBOL and the OFC. Key historical and organisational information
on each confederation is set out below.




                                                        59
