HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT



> 3.5. UEFA’s club licensing system and financial fair play

One key challenge for European football is the need to encourage Europe’s professional clubs to adopt
sustainable business models. With that objective in mind, UEFA introduced a club licensing system in
2004, making compliance with its requirements – which include minimum standards for sporting matters,
infrastructure, personnel, administration, media activities and finances – compulsory for clubs that wish to
participate in UEFA competitions (UEFA.com, n.d. (m)).

UEFA’s new club licensing system provided a comprehensive overview of the financial health of European
football (UEFA, 2016). Unfortunately, the picture it painted was one of very significant financial instability (with
the total losses of top-division clubs in Europe totalling €1.67bn in 2010/11, for example). This underlined
the need to address the issue of financial fair play in European football, at a time when many clubs were
effectively seeking to buy sporting success through excessive debt-financed expenditure on player salaries
and transfers, which undermined the sporting integrity of competitions and drove many clubs to bankruptcy,
while also driving up the operating costs of well-managed clubs.

The scale of the financial crisis in European football led UEFA to build on the framework of its club licensing
system in order to incorporate financial fair play. New rules – the UEFA Club Licensing and Financial Fair Play
Regulations (UEFA, 2018) – were gradually introduced between 2010/11 and 2013/14 (UEFA.com, n.d. (n)).

The ‘no overdue payables’ criteria (under which clubs must prove that they have settled all debts owed to
other clubs, employees and social security/tax authorities) were made stricter, with clubs that were behind
on their payments having UEFA competition prize money withheld until their debts were settled. Also, a
new ‘break-even requirement’ entered into force for financial reporting periods ending in 2012 and 2013,
preventing clubs from spending more than they earn and, as of 2013/14, being used to assess all clubs
wishing to take part in UEFA club competitions. This initiative was welcomed by various UEFA stakeholders,
notably the ECA and the European Commission.

The impact of UEFA’s financial fair play initiative has been significant: clubs assessed under the UEFA Club
Licensing and Financial Fair Play Regulations reduced their overdue payables from €57m in the 2011 financial
year to just €2m in 2019, and reported combined pre-tax profits of €570m and €140m in 2017 and 2018
respectively, compared with pre-tax losses of €1.67bn in 2011 (UEFA, 2020b).

> 3.6. UEFA’s other key regulatory functions

UEFA also has a number of other important regulatory functions that it fulfils in cooperation with its member
associations (and, where appropriate, FIFA). First, UEFA combats betting fraud, notably by means of the betting
fraud detection system that it launched in September 2009. Second, UEFA promotes home-grown players
through its rules on locally trained players. Since the 2008/09 season, clubs participating in the Champions
League and the Europa League have had to have a minimum of eight locally trained players in their 25-player
squads. (It is worth noting, in that regard, that UEFA’s rules make no reference to players’ nationalities, since
such nationality requirements are illegal within the EU on account of the Bosman ruling.) Third, UEFA combats
doping through cooperation with national and international anti-doping agencies, widespread testing across




                                                        58
