HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT



> 4.1. Asian Football Confederation

The AFC is Asian football’s governing body (AFC.com, n.d.). It was formed in May 1954 in Manila, following
informal discussions between 12 countries that were competing at the Asian Games. The first Asian Cup for
national teams was played in Hong Kong in 1956 and was won by South Korea. The AFC has 46 member
associations and is headquartered in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Asian football has developed strongly in recent years. The 2002 FIFA World Cup, for example, was staged
jointly by Japan and South Korea and was a great success. The AFC has its own development programmes and
has also worked to develop its competitions. It currently organises 14 national team and club competitions,
with the AFC Champions League being its flagship club competition.

UEFA and the AFC concluded a new memorandum of understanding in 2015, building on the previous one
signed in 2012 and their positive experience of that partnership. The MoU provides a framework for cooperation
between the two confederations in areas such as competitions, grassroots football, coach education, women’s
football, refereeing, the development of professional football (clubs and leagues) and marketing.

> 4.2. Confédération Africaine de Football

CAF is African football’s governing body. Its origins go back to the FIFA Congress held in Lisbon in 1956.
Representatives of four African countries – Egypt, Ethiopia, South Africa and Sudan – attended the event,
taking the opportunity to discuss matters of common interest. They then reconvened in Khartoum, Sudan, in
February 1957 to draft statutes, and the first Africa Cup of Nations was staged shortly afterwards, with Egypt
winning the inaugural event. CAF is now headquartered in Cairo and has 54 members (CAFonline.com, n.d.).

The organisation of African football has gradually developed over the years, culminating in the highly successful
hosting of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. Held biennially, the Africa Cup of Nations is itself one
of the most successful national team competitions in the world. In 1997, UEFA and CAF began collaborating
on the Meridian development project, which involved partnerships between national associations in Africa
and Europe and culminated in a youth tournament. Then, in February 2014, they signed a memorandum
of understanding with a view to sharing information and experience and cooperating on joint technical
development programmes in areas such as coaching, refereeing, youth football, women’s football, the
organisation of competitions, administration, marketing, media operations and social responsibility.

> 4.3. Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football

CONCACAF, which has 35 members at the time of writing, is the governing body for football in North America,
Central America and the Caribbean (CONCACAF.com, n.d.). Despite being in South America, French Guiana,
Guyana and Suriname are all associate members of CONCACAF – a reflection of their histories as French,
English and Dutch colonies in a predominantly Spanish and Portuguese-speaking continent. CONCACAF
was founded in 1961 in Mexico City as a merger of the Football Confederation of Central America and
the Caribbean and the North American Football Confederation, and it now has its headquarters in Miami.




                                                      60
