HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT



> 2.3. FIFA’s regulatory functions

FIFA, as the governing body of world football, has a number of important regulatory roles, which it performs
in cooperation with the regional confederations and national associations:

    1. Ensuring compliance with the Laws of the Game, as laid down by the IFAB;

    2. Regulating player intermediaries (or ‘agents’, as they are commonly known);

    3. Regulating players’ status and transfers, which includes, critically, regulating the international player
        transfer system using its TMS system (FIFA.com, n.d. (c));

    4. Ensuring, in cooperation with the confederations, that football is free from political interference by
        governments, e.g. interference in the election of national association officials (FIFA, September 2020,
        Article 19);

    5. Ensuring that there is only one football association and one league structure per member country,
        thereby guaranteeing the operational integrity of the global football pyramid (FIFA, September 2020,
        Article 22(3)(e));

    6. Regulating and protecting the health of national team competitions, whereby clubs are compelled to
        release players who are called up for national team competitions unless they are injured;

    7. Through the FIFA Foundation, established in 2018 as an independent entity, helping to foster social
        change around the world and supporting the renovation and reconstruction of damaged or destroyed
        sports infrastructure worldwide.

UEFA is European football’s governing body. Article 51bis(4) of the UEFA Statutes (UEFA, July 2020) shows
how the relationship between FIFA and UEFA is intended to operate in practice and offers an indication of
the way in which FIFA’s relationship with the other five regional confederations operates:

       “[E]ach Member Association [of UEFA] is responsible for deciding national issues, which may not be
       delegated to the leagues. UEFA is responsible for deciding issues involving more than one Member
       Association concerning its own territory. FIFA is responsible for deciding international issues involving
       more than one Confederation.”

FIFA and UEFA have overlapping responsibilities, since: (i) they both deal with the same sport; (ii) UEFA’s members
are also FIFA members; (iii) they both seek to protect the same sporting values (the system of promotion and
relegation; the fight against violence, corruption and match-fixing; the need to ensure that the Laws of the
Game are not questioned by ordinary/arbitration courts; the fight against political/government interference
in football, etc.); (iv) they both ensure that football matches are always governed by the same standards
(rules on kits, refereeing standards, safety and security rules, infrastructure standards, etc.); and (v) they
both ensure uniformity in the event of rules and regulations being infringed (e.g. anti-doping regulations).




                                                       48
