HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT



As of autumn 2016, the six regional confederations elect 36 of the 37 members of the FIFA Council, with the
other member – the FIFA president – being elected by the FIFA Congress. Each confederation must ensure
that it elects at least one female member.

The office of FIFA president is an executive position and therefore involves very considerable day-to-day
management authority and influence (FIFA, September 2020, Article 35). Following FIFA’s reform process,
the FIFA president can serve a maximum of three four-year terms.

The decisions of the Congress, the Council and the president are implemented by FIFA’s general secretariat
(FIFA, September 2020, Articles 36 to 37), under the direction of its secretary general.

> 2.5. A summary of FIFA’s purpose and activities

FIFA (i) plays an important role in organising and policing the rules of the game, in partnership with the IFAB;
(ii) performs an important football development function through the FIFA Forward programme and the
organisation of a range of international football competitions; (iii) generates large amounts of revenue from
the FIFA World Cup, enabling it to make substantial financial solidarity payments to its member associations;
and (iv) performs important regulatory functions in cooperation with regional confederations and national
associations (FIFA.com, n.d. (e)). Its strategy for successfully performing these functions is set out in a strategic
plan entitled Making Football Truly Global: The Vision 2020–2023 (FIFA.com, n.d. (f)).

> 3. The role of UEFA

UEFA – the Union of European Football Associations – is one of the six regional confederations recognised
by FIFA (FIFA, September 2020, Article 22(1)). It was founded in Basel, Switzerland, in 1954 with two specific
purposes: (i) acting as a representative of European football, particularly in its interactions with FIFA; and
(ii) establishing a cup competition for the top European clubs, which has evolved into today’s UEFA Champions
League.

Headquartered in Nyon, Switzerland, UEFA is a not-for-profit association governed by the Swiss Civil Code.
UEFA has 55 member associations, all of which have the same rights, regardless of their population size or
economic power. Like FIFA, UEFA only recognises one national association and one league pyramid in each
country, thereby helping to preserve the global pyramid of world football. However, a critical distinction
between UEFA and FIFA is that UEFA has more than 60 years’ experience of organising multiple annual, season-
long, international club competitions. FIFA, by contrast, only organises one international club competition:
the FIFA Club World Cup.

UEFA has no formal relationship with the International Olympic Committee, as it is a regional confederation.

UEFA’s corporate purpose is articulated in its statutes (UEFA, July 2020, Article 2), which make it clear that
the primary objective of the organisation is the promotion of football in Europe, based on the principle of
sporting solidarity (redistribution of resources from the elite professional game to the grassroots) as part of a




                                                        50
