                                             CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



It is a fundamental principle of any sports competition economy that, when producing any sporting contest,
at any level, a significant degree of cooperation is required between the various competitors to stage a
match or organise a league competition (Neale, 1964). Similarly, in order to have a steady pool of players
for professional competitions, either national or international, there must be a strong culture of grassroots
participation, which also drives spectators’ interest in watching professional football. So, an interdependent
relationship exists between elite professional football and mass participation at grassroots level. In summary,
each stakeholder in the football ecosystem is, in some way, dependent on the others for its own success.

Historically, the key benefit of the global football pyramid has been to provide a stable operating and regulatory
environment for football development and competitions. FIFA only recognises one national association and
one league pyramid per country and is responsible for drawing up a coordinated international match calendar
each year, which facilitates the efficient operation of complementary international club and national team
competitions. Critically, it has been the maintenance of the integrated football pyramid with the agreement
of all of football’s key stakeholders that has helped it to develop into the world’s most popular participation
and spectator sport. Meanwhile, this has also given rise to a number of hugely successful commercial
revenue-generating activities, from which national associations have benefited. Such initiatives include the
promotion of participatory, spectator and commercial interest in football at domestic level, together with
solidarity projects paid for with the operating surpluses of international competitions, such as the UEFA
European Football Championship, the UEFA Champions League and the FIFA World Cup.

It is important to note that the global sports ecosystem is not static. We are now in an era of globalising
markets, which has ushered in globalising regulatory frameworks, which have an impact on sport’s traditional
autonomy. Within Europe, the creation of the single European market has been the key driver for this process.
As a result, new highly influential stakeholders have emerged, and their impact needs to be managed to
maintain an equilibrium in the sports system.

A good illustration of the emergence of new stakeholders was the European Court of Justice ruling in the
Jean-Marc Bosman case that the football transfer system had unlawfully restricted the player’s right to full
labour market mobility (European Court of Justice, 1995). That decision put an end to foreign player quotas,
both in UEFA competitions and subsequently in all domestic leagues within the European Union (EU).
Consequently, players could move between EU countries at the end of their contracts without a
transfer/tribunal fee being due. This principle was then quickly applied in domestic leagues.

That decision, which had not been anticipated by European football, led to the rapid internationalisation of
football’s labour market and accelerated the explosion in professional players’ wages (which, some would
argue, financially destabilised European football for a while). Critically, the ruling also meant that the EU
institutions were now key stakeholders in the European football ecosystem, and needed to be taken into
account if equilibrium was to be maintained.




                                                       43
