                                           CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



CONCACAF organises various national team competitions (such as the biennial CONCACAF Gold Cup) and
the annual CONCACAF Champions League for clubs. Having previously been staged elsewhere in CONCACAF
territory (Mexico in 1970 and 1986), the 1994 FIFA World Cup in the United States served to significantly
boost participation in North America and was followed by the launch of the Major League Soccer (MLS)
professional league. The 2026 FIFA World Cup will be hosted jointly by Canada, Mexico and the United States.

In April 2014, UEFA and CONCACAF signed a memorandum of understanding with a view to working
together on the development of football.

> 4.4. Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol

CONMEBOL, which has ten members, is the oldest of the world’s regional confederations, having been
founded in 1916 (CONMEBOL.com, n.d.) in order to organise South America’s first national team competition
(the Copa América). It is based in Luque, Paraguay.

The CONMEBOL region has historically been one of the two dominant forces in world football (along with
Europe), with South American teams winning 9 of the 21 FIFA World Cup tournaments to date. One of its
members, Uruguay, hosted the very first World Cup in 1930, and the tournament returned to South America
in 1950 (Brazil), 1962 (Chile), 1978 (Argentina) and 2014 (Brazil). The Brazilian national team has won the
tournament a record five times, most recently in Japan/South Korea in 2002.

CONMEBOL also organises the Copa Libertadores, which is one of the world’s most prestigious club
competitions (along with the UEFA Champions League). One interesting feature of the Copa Libertadores
(and the Copa América) is that teams from other confederations (usually teams from CONCACAF countries,
such as Mexico) are sometimes invited to take part. From 1960 to 2004, UEFA and CONMEBOL pitted their
respective European and South American club champions against each other in what was effectively a world
club championship. Originally known as the Intercontinental Cup, before becoming the Toyota Cup in 1980,
the competition was superseded by FIFA’s Club World Cup in 2005.

In May 2012, UEFA signed a memorandum of understanding with CONMEBOL, covering various forms of
cooperation, and that agreement was then renewed in 2020.

> 4.5. Oceania Football Confederation

The smallest of the world’s six regional football confederations in terms of the total population of the
countries represented (oceaniafootball.com, n.d.), the OFC was formed in 1966 by the national associations
of Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea. It is based in Auckland, New Zealand, and currently
has 11 full and 3 associate members.

In 2006, Australia left the OFC to join the AFC. And in 2008, an associate member, the Northern Mariana
Islands Football Association, followed suit. All OFC members apart from New Zealand are small island states
in the South Pacific, where football is not the dominant sport, and none of its member associations have a




                                                    61
