                                                            CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



sporting pyramid (based on the principle of sporting merit operationalised through the system of promotion
and relegation), working in partnership with its member associations and FIFA.

UEFA has long enjoyed positive and fruitful relationships with Europe’s political authorities. It has engaged
in dialogue with EU institutions and the Council of Europe on a wide variety of matters in order to defend
football’s overall interests, safeguard the ethics of sport and promote good governance. This has often
resulted in European authorities giving valuable support to UEFA’s policies and initiatives, as in the case, for
example, of UEFA’s rules on home-grown players, the collective selling of TV rights, financial fair play, and
UEFA’s efforts to tackle match-fixing and other abusive practices that undermine the integrity of sporting
competitions and threaten athletes’ rights.

The landmark cooperation agreement that was, concluded by UEFA and the European Commission in 2014,
which was renewed and extended in February 2018, is further evidence of UEFA’s desire to intensify its
cooperation with European authorities in key policy areas (UEFA.com, n.d. (a)).

> 3.1. How UEFA is organised

The framework through which UEFA operationalises its role as the governing body of European football is
set out in the UEFA Statutes (UEFA, July 2020). These inform the implementation of regulatory policy across
UEFA’s 55 member associations through the principle of subsidiarity, whereby the national associations
implement the decisions of the UEFA Congress in a manner consistent with local conditions.

Figure 1.2 shows UEFA’s organisational structure. The most important institution in the organisation is the
UEFA Congress (UEFA, July 2020, Articles 12 to 20), which elects the UEFA president, the UEFA Executive
Committee and European members of the FIFA Council.


                                                                    CONGRESS               External auditors *1
                                                              (Member Associations)

                                    Court of Arbitration
                                          for Sport *2

                                       Organs for the        EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
                                       Administration                                      Governance and
                                                                  President               Compliance auditors
                                         of Justice



                                         Professional             General secretary
     Subsidiaries *3                   Football Strategy                                       Committees         Expert panels
                                           Council                 Administration


*1 See Article 46 of the UEFA Statutes
*2 See Articles 61 to 63 of the UEFA Statutes
                                                 Match officers                       Instructors
*3 As created by the Executive Committee in
order to achieve the objectives defined
in Article 2 of the UEFA Statutes



   Figure 1.2: The organisational structure of UEFA




                                                                         51
