HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT



professional domestic league. Wellington Phoenix FC, for example, are based in New Zealand, but play in
the Australian A-League.

UEFA is a major supporter of the OFC’s football development activities, and in 2012 it signed a memorandum of
understanding with the OFC (complementing another agreement concluded in 2010), under which it pledged
to support grassroots development programmes and help to encourage best practice in the OFC’s territory.

> 4.6. UEFA Assist

In 2016, the UEFA Executive Committee approved a new support programme called UEFA Assist, which
seeks to meet the needs of national associations and confederations outside Europe (UEFA.com, n.d. (q)).
By rechannelling FIFA Forward funds allocated to UEFA, the programme helps the development of the game
by promoting and organising football activities around the world.

UEFA Assist has four main objectives: (i) support the development of managerial capabilities, primarily in
the football and operations fields; (ii) support youth development; (iii) support small-scale infrastructure
development projects; and (iv) support and encourage cooperation between UEFA’s member associations
and national associations in other confederations around the world.

The UEFA Assist programme has formalised the ad hoc support that was already being given to other
associations and confederations in terms of knowledge sharing and football development. In cooperation
with FIFA and the other confederations, support and assistance is spread evenly across non-European national
associations around the world.

> 5. Conclusion

This chapter looked at how world football is organised. The metaphor of a biological ecosystem was chosen,
since the football environment evolves as new stakeholders emerge and needs to be kept in equilibrium in
order to bring maximum benefits to all stakeholders. The impact of new and existing stakeholders needs
to be kept under constant evaluation through a process of strategic analysis. Effective policies can then be
developed in response.

Critically, it should be noted that the current system for organising football at global, regional and national
level has served the game well, not only as a spectator and participation sport, but also as a promoter of
public health and general well-being and as a business. The system is complex, and special care needs to
be taken when managing stakeholders, but the benefits of such effective management are compelling.




                                                      62
