HANDBOOK OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION MANAGEMENT



Through its decisions, the Congress establishes the operating framework for the president and the Executive
Committee. Member associations are entitled to propose items for the agenda of the UEFA Congress. In
essence, UEFA acts as a representative democracy.

Together with the president, the Executive Committee implements the decisions of the Congress through
the UEFA administration. The Executive Committee comprises the president, 16 other members (including
at least one woman) elected by the Congress, two members elected by the European Club Association
(ECA), and one member elected by the European Leagues. The appointees representing the ECA and the
European Leagues are ratified by the Congress and have the same rights and duties as other members
(see Section 3.2 for details).

The president is UEFA’s public representative (UEFA, July 2020, Article 29). The current president, Aleksander
Čeferin (a former president of the Football Association of Slovenia), was first elected to the position in 2016,
before being re-elected in 2019.

Theodore Theodoridis was appointed UEFA general secretary in September 2016. The general secretary is
UEFA’s most senior executive officer (UEFA, July 2020, Articles 30 to 31).

In addition, a series of committees made up of national association representatives (some of which also
include club representatives) advise on the drafting and implementation of UEFA policies.

Critically, the UEFA Statutes apply the principle of the separation of powers, separating UEFA’s judicial and
executive roles. UEFA has four judicial bodies, known as the Organs for the Administration of Justice (UEFA,
July 2020, Article 32(1)). These are (i) the Control, Ethics and Disciplinary Body; (ii) the Appeals Body; (iii)
UEFA’s ethics and disciplinary inspectors; and (iv) the Club Financial Control Body. As their names imply, these
bodies deal with all disciplinary matters, both on and off the field, with the Club Financial Control Body
dealing primarily with matters of club licensing and financial fair play. The Court of Arbitration for Sport in
Lausanne is the ultimate court of appeal for decisions made by UEFA’s disciplinary bodies (UEFA, July 2020,
Articles 60 to 63).

In April 2017, the Congress voted to include a provision in the UEFA Statutes specifically stating that ethics
and good governance were statutory objectives of the organisation (UEFA, July 2020, Article 2(1)(f)).

> 3.2. UEFA’s stakeholder engagement principle

Historically, UEFA has formed part of a three-tier hierarchical structure comprising UEFA, national associations
and clubs. However, in response to the changing landscape of European football as a result of (i) the
extraordinary revenue growth generated by European football, especially UEFA competitions; and (ii) the
globalisation of player markets, which has involved the emergence of important new actors in European
football, UEFA has also developed a complementary lateral ‘stakeholder engagement’ structure, formally
recognised in Article 3bis of the UEFA Statutes (UEFA, July 2020):




                                                      52
