                                           CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



A major change to the format of the FIFA World Cup was announced in 2017, when the FIFA Council (see
below) approved a decision to expand the event to a 48-team tournament from 2026. As of that tournament,
the group stage will comprise 16 groups of three, with the top two teams from each group advancing to a
32-team knockout stage (FIFA.com, 10 January 2017).

As a not-for-profit organisation with a primary objective of developing football worldwide, FIFA’s biggest
single item of expenditure over the 2015–18 period, after operating expenses and the cost of organising
competitions, was – unsurprisingly – football development and education, with such spending totalling
$1.67bn and accounting for 31.1% of its overall expenditure (FIFA, 2020, p. 21).

Historically, the chief engines of FIFA’s football programme were the Goal Programme and the Financial
Assistance Programme. However, at the 66th FIFA Congress in Mexico City in May 2016, the then newly
elected FIFA president, Gianni Infantino, introduced the FIFA Forward programme, which represented a
complete overhaul of FIFA’s football development programmes (FIFA.com, n.d. (b)). FIFA Forward seeks to
provide 360-degree, tailor-made support for football development in each of FIFA’s member associations
and the six confederations, incorporating a significant increase in financial support and enhanced evaluation
and auditing processes. The second cycle of FIFA Forward (FIFA Forward 2.0) started on 1 January 2019 and
will run until 31 December 2022.

As well as the World Cup, FIFA also organises a range of other competitions (see Table 1.2). Almost all of
these run at a loss, but are financed and organised by FIFA as part of its wider football development role.

 Men’s competitions                           Women’s competitions                         Others

                                                                                           FIFA Interactive
 FIFA World Cup                               FIFA Women’s World Cup
                                                                                           World Cup

 FIFA U-20 World Cup                          FIFA U-20 Women’s World Cup

 FIFA U-17 World Cup                          FIFA U-17 Women’s World Cup

 FIFA Club World Cup                          Women’s Olympic Football Tournament

                                              Women’s Youth Olympic Futsal
 FIFA Futsal World Cup
                                              Tournament

 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup

 Men’s Olympic Football Tournament

 Men’s Youth Olympic Futsal Tournament

 Blue Stars/FIFA Youth Cup


  Table 1.2: FIFA competitions




                                                     47
