                                             CHAPTER 1: THE ORGANISATION OF WORLD FOOTBALL



       “UEFA, as the football governing body at European level, may recognise and involve in the consultation
       process in European football matters, groups representing the interests of the various stakeholders of
       European football (leagues, clubs, players, supporters), provided that they are:
         a) organised in accordance with UEFA’s Statutes, regulations and values;
         b) constituted in a democratic, open and transparent manner.”

A key vehicle for implementing UEFA’s stakeholder engagement strategy has been the Professional Football
Strategy Council, or PFSC (UEFA, July 2020, Article 35). Chaired by the UEFA president, the PFSC is made
up of representatives of the European Leagues, the European Club Association and FIFPro Division Europe
(the European arm of FIFPro, the world players’ union), together with four representatives of UEFA’s member
associations (four UEFA vice-presidents). Since 2007, UEFA’s stakeholder engagement strategy has also
been underpinned by memorandums of understanding (MoUs) between UEFA and each of the three main
stakeholder bodies: FIFPro, the ECA and the European Leagues.

FIFPro was founded in 1965 and is based in Hoofdorp, in the Netherlands. It represents more than 50,000
professional players around the world, with 65 member associations at national level (FIFPro.org, n.d.).

The ECA was established in 2008 and is based in Nyon, Switzerland. It is the only independent body that
directly represents football clubs at European level (ecaeurope.com, n.d. (a)). In the 2019/20 season, it had 109
full and 137 associate members (ecaeurope.com, n.d. (b)). UEFA’s current MoU with the ECA was concluded
in 2019 and runs until 2024. Under that MoU, two ECA representatives sit on the UEFA Executive Committee.

The ECA also provides half of the board members of UEFA Club Competitions SA, a UEFA subsidiary set
up following the consultation of all European football stakeholders in relation to the organisation of the
2018–21 UEFA club competition cycle. That subsidiary provides advice and recommendations to the UEFA
Club Competitions Committee on strategic business matters and opportunities, which are then referred up
to the UEFA Executive Committee for approval (UEFA.com, 2 June 2017).

The European Leagues was founded in 2005 and is based in Nyon, Switzerland. It acts as the common voice
of professional football leagues across Europe on all matters of common interest (europeanleagues.com,
n.d. (a)). It has 27 full, 6 associate and 3 development members (europeanleagues.com, n.d. (b)). UEFA’s
current MoU with the European Leagues was concluded in 2019 and runs until 2022. Under that MoU, one
representative of the European Leagues sits on the UEFA Executive Committee.

UEFA’s strategy of structured engagement with key stakeholders now also extends to its relationship with
supporter organisations (UEFA.com, n.d. (b)). Football Supporters Europe (FSE), an independent, representative
and democratically organised European association of football supporters, was launched with UEFA’s backing
in 2009 and is recognised as UEFA’s official interlocutor on issues affecting fans. UEFA also supports the
activities of SD Europe, a network that advises fan groups on how to become involved in the ownership and
running of their clubs, as well as working with the Centre for Access to Football in Europe (CAFE) to improve
stadium accessibility and enable more supporters with disabilities to enjoy football at all levels of the game.
SD Europe and CAFE, in partnership with UEFA, also work with clubs to enforce the supporter liaison officer




                                                      53
